# The way I got myself out of the depth of a six-month depression without medication.

I had depression when I first entered college as a new freshman. Such an experience destroyed my old self and rebuilt new purposes and principles,  which are likely to be carried out through the rest of my life. It re-framed my identity.  I would like to share my experience, which cost me dearly,  and the lesson I learned from it. Here is my story.

## Cause

There is a cause that leads to depression. It often drives someone to extreme sadness, an overwhelming feeling of hopelessness, and confinement of the mind and perceptions. I lost hope when I was unable to choose my major for college, given the fact that I was so passionate to engage in technologies that would open a new era for the future. I set my mind to pursue artificial intelligence in the year 2002 and was waiting to carry it out in 2003. Unfortunately, I was prevented from executing such a plan. I heard voices stating that I would be unable to change my major later in my life, and I would be doomed with what I picked up at the college entrance. It sounds silly now. But as an 18-year-old, I had a vision of the future and I set it as the purpose and value of myself. And I lost it. As a result, I lost myself.

## Symptoms

The symptoms of depression are easy to be overlooked by others. I attended all the classes; I submitted all my homework; I ate; I sleep. I did not yell. I did not fight. I did not cry. But the numbness of the mind was present. I performed poorly in learning, although I entered my college with high scores. Each day seemed like chores -- I did nothing besides the fundamental requirements. I did not play. I did not talk much to the people around me, including my roommates. I did not go to other places. I did not seek social activities. I did not participate in anything which might decorate a pale living. I did not communicate with my parents, although my school was only 20-40 mins by bus from my home and I stayed home each weekend. It felt like my connection to this world was broken. I became an invisible entity that was outside of life circle. I used all my spare time only to sleep. Suicidal thoughts were also present. I thought about giving up this life and jumping to eternal rest quite a few times. Two reasons restricted me from taking such an action: (1) my parents still loved me, and I did not want to hurt them; (2) it would not change anything except labeling myself to this complete failure and doom.

## The cure

During the first semester, I was sick every month. Each time it started to get better I was sick again. (It might be that I did not have difficulty to sleep because of my illness.) It was a disaster not only spiritually, but also physically. At the end of the first semester, I decided I could bear it no more, and I had to change it. I wish I would tell a story that everything became different with such a thought. It was not. My mind was so dull. I was having a hard time understanding people's words, what they were saying, what was taught in the classes, what was written in the textbook, etc. Everything was difficult. I needed something to start with. Therefore, I decided to use physical sports to make a difference first. I chose to use physical delightfulness to penetrate my dull mind as a beginning. Then, almost whenever I could, I went to the outdoor ping-pong playground in our university and played with whoever was available, a stranger or an acquaintance. Many times I went there by myself and met someone new and did a short self-introduction. I might use the same lines over and over. But I started to talk. Another action was to recite names, especially names in my class. I was assigned as a member of a 105-head-class, and we did many things all together: attending all mandatory courses, sports games, class activities, etc. Reciting names helped me make connections. It not only put me in front of others but also stroke and strengthened the bonds into my mind. A third action was to rebuild communications to others, even shallow conversations. I frequently participated in a second-language oral practice called "English corner" at my university. The content was self-introduction. Most of the time I met strangers. But the practice of speaking about myself promoted the bond to the outer world. A fourth strategy I used was self-suggestion. Many times I stated (something like) "Oh I am such a smart person" in front of others (when I had the chance) and they laughed. Self-compliment does not exist in Chinese culture. I did not study psychology, and I do not know about the real benefits. I chose to adopt it to promote a positive attitude toward myself.

Therefore, in general, I adopted four practices to free myself from depression. But the mind soaked in hopelessness was the core and source of all problems. I had to treat my mind to take out the root. I decided I would start to live with this very hopelessness. "So what?!" I accepted that I was living without hope and potential achievement. I prepared myself for the worst that could happen -- I might live with something I do not like throughout my life. "So be it." I re-framed my identity from a "doer" to a "survivor". "It is great that I made it so far." I re-pointed my purpose from "to become a useful person" to "nothing but to practice existence". I wanted nothing but to survive. "I do not care who I am, what I am. I only care about where I am, and what I am doing." Therefore, instead of letting the negative feelings wear me out, I focused on the current state -- I concentrated on what I could do at the time. Instead of making plans for the future (as a college student), I focused on what was possible for me to pick up right at the time.

## Improvements

It was a fight that lasted several years. No one intervened during the process. I had to re-learn almost everything. Fortunately, I was able to make progress from time to time. For example, I got Ds during the first semester. For the second term, I got Cs. Later, I got B+s and As. I stayed healthy throughout my sophomore, junior, and senior years. Another aspect was social activities. Though not necessarily sufficient, I was interacting with others. I teamed up with other people for competitions during the third year of college. I joined a meaningful club later when I was working for my master's degree.

When I fought against depression, I observed the change of my attributes. I was labeled "smart" in high school, but I underperformed in college. I became "diligent". I had to pay extra attention to everything, including to understand people's words and undertake simple tasks. It also took me an effort to relate myself to the world and others. When I was in a group, I felt like an observer instead of a participant. When I spoke, it felt like I was an imposter, and I was not in control of my speech. Once in a one-on-one conversation, it felt like my partner was an actress, and I was an audience -- there was no interaction in between; I only watched. At the time she was expecting my response, my brain fell in a blank-state. I did know how to react. Finally, at my graduation, my class went out for karaoke. I watched them singing. That time, I was able to feel their joy. But I was not able to take part in it until someone dragged me to sing with them. One time when I was in Stevens (Institute of Technology), I shared that I had been out of my country for four years and still did not have a desire to go back, someone remarked: "are you a beast?". I might be less emotional than I supposed to be. (To date, I do not know if I would be different if I did not have depression. I do not have evidence.)

A sign that marked an end of my depression was I became emotional when I looked back on those experiences. It drew tears on my cheeks. I took my reflection. I learned a lesson that social activities are a necessity, and I should make reservations for self-check-up periodically. Now, I am on guard against depression. I become alert to self-isolation along with inactivity. Occasionally, it did happen. Then, I tried to motivate myself to engage in conversations or reach out to others. I shifted my mind from what is missing to what I am blessed with and what I am capable of doing. And it would become better.

##  Conclusion

Reconsidering my depression, evidence showed that I still had love at the time. I had the love for my parents which prevented hurtful actions. I had the love for myself which motivated the strong will to fight against it. Another aspect is physical damage to my brain might be present. The re-learning experience indicates that I lost some functionalities. It is important to treat depression sooner than later.

My story does not mean that the medication is not useful or helpful. I think different cases should be treated differently. But the potentially problematic mindset is important and should be addressed. It took me a strong will for this fight. And physical engagements might be easy assets to make improvements.

I dedicate this article to those who are associated with depression, and those who are interested in it.

## Recap

It took me to reconsider my actions when writing this article. I did not explicitly put it into the language as for what I was doing at the time. I welcome questions and communications. (Email: drssth@gmail.com)
